# ETM 1010

* Leading Change Fundamentals
* Gary Bolles - Lecturer, Founder of eParachute.


## Understanding Change

### Why is change now expontential?
* Technology, organization, etc.
* Pace and spread is accelerating in all industries.
* We're experiencing exponential change. 
* A cell phone or & self-driving car are industry-changing.
* The days of *reactive* change are over.
* We have to use *proactive* change & be disruptive ahead of time.


### The death of change management
* Needs continually change & old planning is dead.
* A five or ten year plan with gantt charts would be produced & done.
* With exponentilal change, change management is dead.
* So now we do "managing change" which is agile, strategic, adaptive.

To lead change, answer the questions:
1. What is the change for the vision you want to see. (Well articulated)
2. What will you wish you had done today?
3. How will you know you are successful (which metrics will define that?)

## You as the Change Leader

### What kind of change leder are you?

There are three types of power in the workplace:
1. Positional Power. Your default argument is "because I said so" and you give orders. It's a power tree of who reports to whom.
2. Relational Power. This determines your connection to someone else who has positional power). *Because they said so*.
3. **Personal Power** is what I have. Digital hirearchies are flattening nowadays. Using this is the most effective way to lead in the futur according to this guy.

### Critical Skills for Leading Change

Basically the world is unknown. So you have to balance:
1. Inspire others
2. Commit to your vision.
3. Be strong
4. Be decisive.
5. Be resilient.
6. Be open.
7. Empower others.
8. Be empathetic. 
9. Have a sense of humor. (Foster a nice work env?)

Admit when you have mistakes. Be decisive, but don't f- up but when you do, forgive yourself. A lot of this is contradictory so it's a balancing act.

### Having the Courage to Change
Have courage to be right, wrong, and everything I guess. 
You're likely to run into stiff resistance. 
The opponents of the future have *delay* in-mind. 
Why are you making other people look bad? 
Others want you to avoid change.

You might wake up and wonder if it's important or worthwhile.

Where to find courage:
1. Inside yourself. Your core values.
2. A friend, mentor, and someone you can vent/strategize with outside of your orgnaization and have no stake in the change you're leading. Not your spouse or significant other. Someone who can offer you support sand objectivity. 
3. Look to the colation of the willing. Those in your organization that support your initiative. 

Celebrate your wins big nor small. Set the right metrics ahead of time. See change is actually positive yada yada yada. 

## Leading Change

### Getting Ready to Change
* See change-methods pdf?
1. People are complicated.
2. People are hard.
3. Leading people is harder.


How do we help to channel the peoples. In the era of instantaneous communications, managing is becoming less and less useful? Traditional ways of management are at least. It's now about leadership.

Traditional ones are people-based or organization wide. People-based models are bottom-up and focus on how people change and then spread it up. Top-down is the other way where someone at the top makes a decision and forces everyone has to do it.

#### Notable Change Models
* ADKAR by Proci
* Transition Model by William Bridges
* Death & Dying Author Elizabeth K Ross
* 7 Ha bits of Highly Effective People
* In Search of Excellence (7S Model?) 
* Leading Change by John P. Potter

They all say people resist change inherently. Adkar is a popular one. He's a consulting company dude:

1. Awareness of the problem
2. Desire to change
3. Knowledge of the change process
4. Ability to change
5. Reinforcement to Change.

#### Choosing a People Based Model
This is for people like me who do not want to manage anything organizational-wide.

#### Viral Change Model
* Use for exponential change
* Engineer lasting change.
* TODO: find more what this is online & via googling.

### Aligning your Organization for Change
Ask three questions to ask workers in an organization:

The video froze for this one... maybe go back or skip.

Assess/Aligning your Organization:
1. Set 3-5 high level goals. (Should be reasonable tactical. What is the org trying to accomplish in the next 6 months? Check for release once/quarter).
2. Communicate your goals every quarter on anongoing basis.
3. (More)

### Your Inclusive Plan for Change
1. Write a vision statement.
2. Define the **problem to solve** as particularily as possible.
3. Figure out/communicate/articulate the problem. Get others on board & **tell a story**.
4. Define the **barriers** to solving that problem.
5. Know enough of the history for the narrative others will use to join you.
6. What type of assets/tools do I have and can use today? 
7. Do I have the energy, time, and commitment to make it happen?
8. Get **feedback** from others. (See step 3, people who actually have the problem? Do they see the problem the way you do?)

This is what he calls building a coalition of the willing. Hone it based on input you receive.

### Helping People Change
We talk about Carl who relies on routine & repetition. Likes having things the same. Likes the certainty of a place for everything & everything in its place. Reliable stuff. The work environment needs to be the same for him. OTHER PEOPLE will proactively find out things that'll come up and push the envelope. 

In the exponentially changing world, we need more people with people who can react to changing environments. **Carl Dzalwick?** defines a static or dynamic mindsets about change. 

Fixed & static mindsets lets you have predictability & control. 

Quotes some pain/pleasure thing. If you see doing something different that they have to changd... but create the conditions where people can practice a growth mindset.

We have this as kids. By using our creatvitity maybe like IACT, it develops a growth mindset. Maybe lead a brainstorming exercise for a creative process?

Teach the basics of creative problem solving. Lead a process for how to do things faster, better, or more creatively.

See handouts for "Change Techniques" handout. Thre's at least five external resources listed. We'll use it to help others develop a better mindset.

### Helping Teams Change
One of the most effective ways to lead is to start with a single team. Build the team that continually adapts. 

Help your team change by:
1. Develop and share your  vision of the future. 

Ways tio gain team buy-in:
1. "How might we..." and involve everyone in designing that team approach. 
2. Ask "if we're successful, how will we know" to keep them on-track?
3. Create psychological safety. The single most important is their ability to share without others dismissing their contributions. Especially for combinatoin of introvers/extraverts and team members who frequently dismiss others stuff. 
4. Maybe block out some goals/expectations for a safe meeting. Have *rules*. Ask questions of those who would normally remain silent. 
5. Seek Many Perspectives.
6. Agile? Tight focus and idk.

Deliberatively ask people out of our team to contribute/help?


### Helping Organizations Change

How to catalogue change:
1. Articulate the problem by telling a story.
2. Articulate the benefits of the solution
3. Do change. 


Embrace emergent leaders. People who want to jump in & help. Recruit middle-management. Middle managers ensure that widespread change will be lasting. They can stonewall your initiatves.

## Defining the Change you Want to Be

### Inventory your Organization's Culture
Know what your org's culture really is?

* Is is the ground where you plant your seeds & change.
* What is the culture we want & what is the percentage of people williung to join the culture with us? And then lay off those who don't want to do that. 
1. Examine your culture
2. Sign up people for your change.
3. Allow others to opt-out from your plan if they don't want to go with it.



### Leading Digital Transformation
* Every business will be a computer/software business (Microsoft).
* Everyone will need to leverage technology to be competitive.
* Managing customer relations & do rapid change and get/settle/deliver information matters.

#### Characteristics of Digital Transformation
1. Cloud computing.  (So our IT dept doesn't have to buy/maintain)
2. Agile processes.
3. Flat Hirearchy so anyone can communicate rapidly with others.

#### How to Lead a Digital Transformation
1. Understand your business deeply.
2. Prioritize the most important segments of your org.
3. Build nimble task forces that can build a roadmpa the technologies & have business components to increase their effectiveness.
4. Gain rapid wins
5. Show the impact of your change. (Both near-term & lasting).

### Leading a Culture of Innovation
You cannot ignore the fact taht innovative industries are better.

### Social Responsibility
You need to have a meaning & purpose. 
Have actions driven by clearly articulated values.

Value-driven companies will probably focus on other things besides
enhancing sharehodler value. 

Shareholders alone do not matter. So do employees, contractors, partners, and communities in which your operate in. 

## Driving Sustainable Change

### How to think bigger when changing
Can you make it 10x better? 10x cheaper?
Focus everything you do around 10x thinking.
That's exponential thinking
Not incremental thinking/results.

Don't start with core business processes. Instead, start with a new product group, a new customer base, something else to come up with new ways of doing their work. Then have that turn into 10x expansions for the organization. 

### Change and Your Adapative Organization
What if your org was continually adoptive & infused deeeply into your organization? Companies like Osana manaage the entire organization in four sprints called chapters. Then they stop to revamp their plans.

Valve Software are perpetually collaborative
and do not have employee management? 


Your departments should be taught to do creative problem-solving. 
Why can't every single worker act as a catalyst for change?
Everyone should feel ready to adopt & change.

Thinkk of it like network coordinator. Expalnd ways which others can work
with our organization. 

Increase the org's ability to dynamically bind behind problems.
Everyone needs to be a life-long learne.

Everony needs to be empowered to improve the organization with their best stuff.

Everyone needs portfolios of work to be like "what are they working on and doing".

Every worker needs to bee responsible for bringing new talents into the organization.

Should infultrate every aspect of the organization. Human-driven design needs to be implemented everywhere & generally more. 

Don't do annual-reviews, but active, proactive feedback that permeates conversations. 

See also - developing adaptable employees & adaptqable managers courses offered by this Gary Bolles dude.

 
### Next Steps
1. Begin Today.
2. Focus on small, rapid wins.
3. Move quickly.
4. Track your progress.
5. Regoznize Success



