# How Propaganda Works
Michael Chase, Dec 11, 2020
## Introduction
Everybody lies. The traditional "honesty is the beset policy" sounds ideal, but is not always viable. For example, if someone walked into a Dairy Queen and asked the manager if it's a good career choice, the manager will agree. If a college essay prompts one to describe their best moment in high school, it should be professional in nature. Awards and work experience are appropriate, but even though sex was much more enjoyable, it is a terrible topic of discussion in a college essay. Everyone has an agenda and are subtly lying through are teeth. People do this for money, for professionalism, for love, for acceptance, for popularity, for self-esteem, or all these combined. Some people see biased, misleading, or dishonest information as an annoyance, wrong, or injustice; however, most do not actively realize those lies.


The Merriam-Webster dictionary defines propaganda as "the spreading of ideas, information, or rumor for the purpose of helping or injuring an institution, a cause, or a person." Individuals rarely consider their behaviors to be propaganda because it is often harmless. By contrast, those with larger audiences can cajole false ideologies. People today rarely pause to think and make a conscious decision about their information. It does not matter if what one is being told is a lie because people do not have the bandwidth to make a conscious decision, which makes them expendable and exploitable.


Jason Stanley, in his book How Propaganda Works, argues propaganda diminishes democratic values within society. Disseminated information presented to audiences often defines how a person sees the world. Without critical thinking, the ability to objectively assess information, people become extremely susceptible to mass manipulation. This often puts an enormous power in the hands of the media and causes the political climate to stagnate, since people do not have access to information outside this propaganda machine. Jason Stanley argues flawed ideologies, legitimized through propaganda, undermine actual democratic values. Stanley’s analysis and explanation of how propaganda works ultimately relevant in today’s post-truth society within a liberal, democratic society.


## Summary
Jason Stanley’s arguments and analysis are complex and rigorous; however, they all support one central goal of explaining how propaganda works. I will provide insight and two of his central themes and analyze each of them. I will begin by describing how liberties cause material inequalities and therefore cause problems for liberal democratic societies by citing Stanley’s evidence and comparing it to existing campaigns. Then, I will explain how a subset of propaganda, called demagogic propaganda, cripples civic rhetoric by incorrectly justifying false ideologies. Similarly, I will compare Stanley’s evidence with my own observations.

### Inequality Develops Flawed, Irreversible Ideologies
Rights do not necessarily protect freedom. Fulfilling all of one's democratic rights does not necessarily provide for a life of free and happy liberty. Rather, the potential for individual liberty in a liberal democratic society only exists if all are guaranteed equal opportunity to understand true, reasonable civic rhetoric and contribute to discussions which lead to laws determining how their society is run.

Stanley specifically claims material inequalities cause problems for liberal democracies because inequalities cause contradicting democratic ideals.  An obvious example is the inequality between rich and poor citizens. Someone who must spend the majority of their time laboring will not have the adequate time or financial means to participate in their democracy. Despite having the same liberties, those who are rich can exercise their spare time purchasing flyers and spreading propaganda. Those who are poor will neither have time nor the money to study, participate in civic rhetoric, or spend time creating counter-propaganda. Clearly, the poor are underrepresented, and the rich have more of an impact in determining ideas which after much time become ideologies. Stanley does not argue this is a moral or political problem, but rather an *epistemological* problem, by concluding that “the ones that are flawed in the relevant sense are the ideologies that are genuine barriers to the acquisition of knowledge” (Stanley 200). Once an ideology is established, people will rarely reverse their beliefs because it is incorporated into their *social identity,* even when faced with good counter-evidence. Clearly, flawed ideologies cause epistemic issues, but demagogic propaganda especially impairs rational thinking.

### Demagoguery Prevents Rational Thinking
In an ideal democratic society, civic rhetoric would be far more valued and popular. Stanley clearly argues “the normative ideal of public reason is central to liberal democracy” because civic discourse is rational and can be assessed “solely by its impact on the truth of the issues at hand” (Stanley 94). Unfortunately, propaganda is often a hazard and democratically problematic; however, it is important to note not all propaganda is malefic.

Stanley describes two types of propaganda: *supportive propaganda* and *undermining propaganda*. Supportive propaganda appeals to emotions to draw attention to a specific subject; yet, “it is of a kind that tends to increase the realization of those very ideals by either emotional or other non rational means” (Stanley 52). For example, cigarette boxes have warnings on them stating they are harmful. Although these warnings are a form of propaganda, citizens have “tacitly granted our permission” to health officials to “look out for the physical health of a democratic nation when its citizens do not have time to do the relevant research” (Stanley 59). Because these warnings are rooted in truth, and the health department has implicit consent, it is supportive of democratic values.


By contrast, undermining propaganda describes contributions to public discourse that are presented as an embodiment of certain ideals, yet they tend to erode and undermine the actual valued ideals (Stanley 53). Clearly, effective persuasion promoting disingenuous, misguided rhetoric is problematic when supporting democratic values for all parties in a society. A powerful example is the war on drugs campaign, where “scientists colluded in a racially biased drive to exaggerate the risks of certain illegal drugs to justify draconian sentencing policies including widely distorted sentencing policies for cheap versions of cocaine used in poor Black communities, versus versions of the same drug used in wealthy white communities” (Stanley xv). Specifically, politicians focused efforts creating harsher laws for cheaper cocaine instead of more expensive, purse cocaine which created a 100-1 sentencing disparity between blacks and whites. Politicians used *science* to justify *law and order*; however, the goal of “establishing the sentencing disparities is not consistent with law and order” (59). Because the propaganda undermines the ideals, it is considered to be undermining propaganda.

## Analysis
In a divided country filled with civil unrest, Jason Stanley's work is necessary to create a renewed understanding of democratic values and civic discourse. For many, propaganda may seem like an antiquated topic. I remember once, one of my professors asked me the difference between public relations and propaganda. I considered the negative sigma attached to propaganda, but did not have that same stigma to P.R. departments. I thought to myself they must be different; yet, in the end, he explained they're the same. The primary difference is the name public relations, which is more likable to the public. They use social science techniques, omit facts, and use mechanisms to persuade people instead. Just like propaganda, public-relations tactics can be of the most dangerous and destructive threats to democratic values.

### Inequality and Flawed Ideologies
The division between the rich and the poor is growing. We are living in an economic and political era where social injustices are becoming more prevalent. Although conditions are improving, there is still a prevailing belief that minorities, women, and the disabled are facing systemic barriers which prevent them from thriving in society. Not surprisingly, these beliefs are shaped and maintained  by the propaganda of social scientists and some politicians. For example, an overly aggressive government and law enforcement is seen as oppressive, because people associate police with police brutality, which might prompt them to exhibit a heightened level of distrust for police.

One recent popular slogan is to "defund the police." This is in a response to police violence and "institutional racism." Police departments nationwide are becoming more and more militarized, and in the past, they have assaulted or murdered black Americans. For example, police shot at Michael Brown, an unarmed 18 year old African American. An officer shot a man twelve times, six hit Brown and killed him. Officer Wilson claimed self-defense, and was not charged for any crime. In a separate case, police murdered Freddie Gray, where medical examiners used unnecessary force. All officers were either acquitted or their charges were dropped, causing protests and riots. Breonna Taylor, George Floyd, and Jacob Blake are other popular names with similar circumstances. After enough tragedies, "protestors, politicians, and religious leaders called for the defunding of police. Defunding refers to taking money allotted to police departments and using it to fund other community resources such as health care, housing, and education that are designed to improve people’s quality of life (Kennedy).

Some believe that "it takes a village" or that all institutions must do their part in preventing social injustice. This strategy could include lobbying politicians to support progressive policies such as Medicaid expansion or "ban the box," among other policies. Responding to the aforementioned protests, supporters call to reallocate funding to educational and welfare institutions. Time and time again, police brutality continues. The Black Lives Matter movement today calls for reallocating the police’s budgets, yet, even though it is a popular opinion, the opinion of elites is the most common source of government opinions. This is often the way in which government policy is created, and although I cannot establish causation, President Trump and Democratic Party presidential nominee Joe Biden were against defunding police departments (Kennedy). Of course, when disagreeing with these opinions, policymakers often use social science rhetoric to support their stance; however, that evidence is sometimes based on flawed ideologies. Soon, I will discuss the "Ban the Box" movement, which will demonstrate how demagoguery rules over rational thinking.

Clearly, I do not know if defunding the police will successfully solve the problem of police brutality. I use the example only to point out that despite despite several tragic deaths and protests, policy has not been changed to support the demands of protesters, and the problem continues.

### Demagoguery and Rational Thinking
There are several arguments made by Stanley in his discussion of demagoguery. Quite often, politicians use it to their advantage. For example, Donald Trump uses the "Make America Great Again" slogan. He uses the word "great," to refer to positive ambiguous democratic values; however, the question of when America was great prevails. With slavery, and women's oppression, America is arguably more equal than ever before. The economic disparity between wealthy and poor has grown; however I submit that the wealth gap is less important than the progress America made advancing democratic rights for women and black people. If my premise is true, then Donald Trump is using propaganda by misleading the public to support democratic ideals in ways that substantially undermine the very democratic values we value as a country.

Donald Trump's example may be low-hanging fruit, but throughout history, demagoguery steers societies wrong. Consider the "Ban the Box" movement. In theory, the practice benefits those applying for jobs. The premise behind the movement is that employers should consider applicants' prior criminal history before hiring them. The very premise of the movement, however, is that those individuals applying for a job are not fit for one because of their criminal record. Due to the demagogic rhetoric used to support the "Ban the Box" movement, such individuals may be viewed with disdain or distrust by employers. Young, black individuals, whether they had a criminal record, were less likely to get a job because it was more likely black people had criminal records. Of course, some social scientists predicted this would happen; however, contributing to rhetorical discussions was ineffective. The propaganda slogan "ban the box" was put in place, and on average, across the U.S., in places that ban the box, employment fell by "5 percent for young black men who didn't have a college degree and by 3 percent for young Hispanic men who didn't have a college degree" (Dubner).

## Concluding Remarks
Since the development of democracy, the stage of democratic discussion and debate has always been a place for civility, rationality, and honesty. Public debate has to be an honest discussion to build and maintain trust between citizens and their elected representatives. However, in a democratic society, discourse itself may be maleficent and hateful if the nature of discourse is influenced by demagoguery and negative rhetoric. By properly understanding the nature of propaganda and how it impairs rational thinking, we can improve our democratic discourse.


## Works Cited
- Dubner, Stephen Produced by Zack Lapinski. “Which Jobs Will Come Back, and When? (Ep. 420).” Freakonomics, 4 June 2020, freakonomics.com/podcast/reemployment-part-1/.
- Kennedy, Adrienne, MA. “Police Reform in the United States.” Salem Press Encyclopedia, 2020. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=ers&AN=146920886&site=eds-live.
- Min, John B. “Propaganda, Ideology, and Democracy: A Review of Jason Stanley, How Propaganda Works.” The Good Society, vol. 24, no. 2, June 2016, pp. 210–217. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=edspmu&AN=edspmu.S1538973115200079&site=eds-live.
- Stanley, Jason. How Propaganda Works. Princeton University Press, 2015. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvc773mm. Accessed 11 Dec. 2020.
- Stanley Jason. “Precis of ‘How Propaganda Works.’” Theoria: An International Journal for Theory, History and Foundations of Science, vol. 31, no. 3, Sept. 2016, pp. 287–294. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=edsjsr&AN=edsjsr.43974638&site=eds-live.