# Why We Fight 
Michael Chase | CMM 350 | Dec 17, 2020

## Abstract

This research essay examines the way in which citizens, especially military personnel, were informed and persuaded to support wartime efforts in the Frank Capra's, *The Battle of Russia*, one episode in the *Why We Fight* series. The purpose of this research is to better understand propaganda strategies which motivate citizens and soldiers in the context of war, so effective techniques may be applied in the future. Additionally, this research aims to examine how propaganda in film affects an individual’s world view.

After reviewing primary evidence in *The Battle of Russia*, researching historical literature, researching propaganda techniques, and researching existing literature on the *Why We Fight* series, this research determines that the series was highly effective at persuading not only the military (the intended audience), but also civilians. 

## Historical Context
To understand the context of the *Why We Fight* series, one must understand the conditions that prevailed during World War II. This section begins with discussions describing historical events like attacks on the USSR and the draft in the United States. After, it describes the advertising that existed at the time by briefly describing the theme of patriotism, war bonds, and the push to conserve resources. After that, it describes cultural opinions, values, and stigmas. Finally, It touches will touch on American pop culture and how melodramas contributed to the *Why We Fight* series. 

### Historical Events

World War II started in 1939 and ended in 1945. In 1940, Germany invaded the Soviet Union. Germany’s primary goal in the USSR was to “control and manage the territory, to exploit its resources, and to prevent the formation to the west… of a power capable of waging war” (Beyda Petrov 373). During the war, the Soviet Union suffered a number of military setbacks, losing territories, cities, and military bases. The Soviet Union lost the cities of Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev, Sevastopol, Stalingrad, Voronezh, Murmansk, Baku, Murom, Kirovograd, and other military bases. 


Hitler rapidly became powerful, and thus became a threat to the United States and its democratic ideals. The United States entered the war in December 1941 after Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor which killed 2,300 Americans. Some members of the US government believed that the US had to win the war for the sake of its citizens, the world’s poor, the post-war rebuilding, and the upholding of democratic values; however, not everyone wanted to go to war. Even worldwide, going to war was not what something people necessarily wanted to do. During WWI, one historian says, “it was impossible to convince a farm boy in Iowa, a driver of a bus in London, or a waiter in a Paris café that he should go to war because of a mud hut in Manchuria” (Rolland). After WWI and following the Great Depression, it was even harder to motivate Americans to go to war. Therefore, in 1943, a massive national draft of men between the ages of 18 and 45 was initiated to enlist, train, and prepare for war. Forcing individuals against their will to fight was not ideal, nor as effective at supporting the war effort. To be most effective in war efforts, it is necessary to win public support; a hard task to accomplish when there is so much working against that ideal.

### Changing War Opinions

In order to win public support, advertising and propaganda is needed; however, to better understand the role propaganda plays, it is importa t to further examine why American citizens do not support war efforts. Starting with the obvious, going to war is expensive and time-consuming. Especially after WWI, most citizens did not want to return to wartime conditions favoring isolationism instead. The isolationism ideology was strong, so much so that the ‘decline of the west’ had a literary movement where famous authors like Ernest Hemingway, T.S. Eliot, and F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote about it (Rollins). Indeed, “much of the literature of the post-war era expresses fears that the democracies had lost their values” (Rollins). Because of this isolationist ideology, Americans believed their “greatest contribution to society [was] the development of his or her unique potential” (German 240). When individuals are doing their own thing, there is little time for involvement in society. Moreover, individuals were hesitant to contribute and invest in their economy because of the Great Depression. 

Ultimately, when the government decides to go to war, it needs the support of the people. To win the support of the people, the war needs to be seen as necessary and valuable. The draft helped recruit soldiers; however, that was not enough to win the war. The country also needed efforts of non-profit organizations like the Red Cross, churches to gather blood from Americans, and other soldiers to voluntarily enlist. The American government needed to develop the myth that fighting and dying for one’s country is selfless and honorable. Speeches were utilized but not effective enough; therefore, to sway public opinion and do it quickly, advertising and propaganda were necessary. 

### A Successful Propaganda Approach
United States advertising focused on one central theme of patriotism during the war and used patriotism to promote more specific actions like joining the military, purchasing war bonds, and conserving resources necessary for wartime efforts. The government used print and radio advertisements with direct calls to action; however citizens were not receptive. Because of existing ideologies like individualism and the decline of the west undermining the credibility of the government, citizens did not see the war as necessary. The existing propaganda techniques did not work, but Hitler’s *Triumph of the Will*, a Nazi propaganda film promoting Hitler and his ideology proved wildly successful. Americans at the time were much more “receptive to a melodrama which cast them as heroes riding to the rescue of a continent distressed,” and thus, Frank Capra joined the department of defense (Rollins 83). Capra and the government used this knowledge and took a new approach, and _”Why We Fight_ would shock, cajole, flatter, and uplift America; using every gimmick in Hollywood's sales kit, it would blend the dark necessity of military service into a theatrical epic” (Rollins 83). It was especially unusual at the time, but it was tremendously successful at persuading the US to support war efforts.

## Film Summary
*The Battle of Russia* tells the story of the Germany’s invasion of Russia from a viewpoint which reflects very positively on Russian people and very poorly on German people. The film establishes a positive narrative of Russian people by demonstrating how kind, innocent, and hardworking they are. For example, Capra portrays Russia’s innocence by showing shots of children dancing with adults and their hard work by showing clips of people working in factories and previous, failed attempts to conquer Russia. The documentary also shows how valuable Russia is by showing its size, resources, and discussion of prior wars. Germany, on the other hand, is depicted as vicious using all sorts of stereotypes to convey this message. It shows Germans executing civilians and murdering women and children, leaving them to die alone and unburied in the cold.

One of the most important themes is Russia’s willpower, sacrifice, and suffering caused by Germans because it supports a hidden purpose of the campaign, which will be discussed in the next section. Russia’s willpower is shown using their unusual war fighting tactics such as guerrilla warfare to surprise and kill German soldiers. All three of these qualities are shown in the scorched earth tactics. By destroying their dams, burning buildings, and anything else of value before retreating, they prevent Germany from using the land to support their own efforts. Watching the suffering of others is powerful, and the narrator sums up the film by explaining that if “We [Americans] lose the war and we lose everything: our honor, the jobs we work at, the books we read, the very food we eat, the hopes we have for our kids, the kids themselves” (Why We Fight).

## Ideology and Purpose
The main purpose of *The Battle of Russia* and the entire *Why We Fight* series is obviously to support the war effort. This purpose can be broken down into much smaller purposes, of which I will describe using four categories: inform citizens, reinforce democratic values, establish necessity, and promote action. The first purpose is objective and rooted in fact while the other three are more persuasive in nature. 

### Inform Military & Citizens
In the 1940s, newspapers and radio were common in the American household; however, not everyone utilized these resources to listen in on war updates. This is especially true for those enlisted in the military, who often did not have access to these newspapers and radio broadcasts. Americans were uninformed about the war, not because the information was not available, but the information was complex, hard to keep up with, and generally not always entertaining.

Knowing the events happening during the war is important for different citizens. Some Americans had family involved with the military, and those Americans surely wanted to know what was happening to their brothers, sisters, sons, and daughters around the world. Others wondered where their tax dollars were being spent. Other Americans simply wanted to have a better understanding of the enemy and current events. Some of these questions were answered via the aforementioned mediums. War efforts were promoted through descriptions of key military developments, descriptions of scenes, and inspiring and heroic stories about American soldiers and civilians who were fighting against the threat of communism. Although some questions are answered, more information is needed to develop and understanding of wartime events.

Even though the facts are oftentimes exaggerated, understanding facts helps show US citizens what the country is fighting for. In the case of *The Battle of Russia,* citizens better understand their allies and enemies. Even though the narrative is heavily persuasive and biased in nature, it is rooted in fact and actual wartime footage. 

### Reinforce American Democratic Values
With varying opinions, literature, and the resulting “decline of the west” ideologies which undermine democratic values, a reminder of American democratic ideals is necessary to establish the purpose of fighting. Peter Rollins, editor of Film & History: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Film and Television Studies, explains that “the more uncertain [people are]… the more their freedoms are scattered in the winds of change, [and] the more they need a ringing statement of America’s democratic ideals” (Rollins 82). By contrast, reminding people of America’s democratic ideals will help Americans understand what exactly they are defending and why it is important.

In *The Battle of Russia,* Russians are portrayed to be fighting with the utmost determination to reject Hitler’s ideals. The strong determination is praised by the narrator as helping them win against the enemy. Implicitly, this argues that loyalty and patriotism are especially important values for individuals to practice in the United States. The narrator never explicitly makes rhetorical arguments; instead, it draws upon Russia to highlight similarities and why democratic values are important. For example, although Russia under the Soviet Union is not a democracy, Peter Rollins describes how techniques are used such that “the Russians are proclaimed as ‘free people’ who love their land and their God” (84). Part of patriotism as a citizen in the United States means supporting and defending the country.

Additionally, the narrator reinforces an American value, that Germany and communism are evil. Rollins again explains that the leaders are “constantly vilified,” but *Why We Fight* went beyond that narrow critique to blame the peoples. The masses have become ‘hopped up’ with the propaganda about racial superiority and have surrendered their dignity and superiority” (Rollins 83). By contrasting Russia’s ‘freedom’ with Germany’s ‘slaves,’ *The Battle of Russia* better defines and reminds Americans of the democratic ideals and patriotism they should fight to uphold.

To summarize, these films attempted to present the US as the defender of freedom and democracy, spreading patriotic values.

### Establish Necessity
Once viewers are reminded of American values and understand facts of the war, Capra makes his audience sympathetic to the war effort by establishing it as necessary. Not only is Germany diminishing democratic values, but America as a country and its values were at stake in World War II because Germany is shown as a growing yet exaggerated perception of the communist threat. 

The film carefully constructs a narrative showing model Americans fighting for strong, good democratic values against a threatening, evil communist country. Making people more sympathetic to the cause makes people realize how important the war is for the US and convinces them to support their countries efforts. 

To summarize, Capra’s film creates patriotism and a desire for national security in two ways: promoting Russian hard-work and showing it is in jeopardy because of Germany’s invasion. By showing the face of America fighting for its values and interests, the film glorified the war and galvanized the public support needed to beat the communism in Europe.

### Promote Action
The entire film series is intended to not just change audience opinions, but encourage citizens to get involved in supporting war efforts. Later, I discuss specific propaganda techniques in depth, but promoting action is clearly illustrated using a short example. Earlier, I mentioned advertising on posters, print, and radio already exists, and Americans know what the government is promoting. This film establishes the importance and urgency of supporting war efforts by utilizing a propaganda choice known as a false choice. Either, all individuals practice hard work and determination by acting to support war efforts to defeat Germany. Otherwise, Germany will take over eliminating all democratic liberties and freedom, killing women and children along the way. 

## The Source
Many entities shaped *The Battle of Russia* in different ways. For example, the army orchestrated the film and Walt Disney created the animations used in maps and battle plans. First, the Department of Defense, and specifically the *Office of War Information* serves to inform the public about the status of the war. With regard to film, they established guidelines such as “requiring filmmakers to focus blame on the political elites” rather than blaming an entire population (Rollins 83). Second was the director Frank Capra. He clearly believed in the values he was promoting in the *Why We Fight* series; however, the means sometimes went against the *Office of War Information’s* guidelines. For example, to establish rapport with Americans he demonized foreign bodies to reflect “the value of individualism found in American society” (German 240). Lastly is Anatole Litvak, the primary director for *The Battle of Russia* specifically. He worked under Capra’s supervision to direct this specific film; however, he did not have as much discretion because the decisions made were expected to be consistent with Capra’s vision. 

## Target Audience

Although *The Battle of Russia* was released into the public domain, the target audience was active duty military members. With a large audience of drafted members forced against their will to fight for causes they did not sign up to fight, motivation was necessary for an effective fight. The traditional medium was to give speeches regarding the battle and why the military is necessary to protect America and its democratic ideals; however, they were not effective. Capra explains that “boys did not like to read, and they did not want to hear lectures… the boys liked films and believed films” (German 239).

The film was not intended to become popular with civilians; however, the entertainment value, simple message, and informational utility made the film and the entire series more enjoyable and easier to watch in comparison to print or radio. The film was also novel because the *Why We Fight* series was the first use of film to convey war information. 

## Film as a Medium
Using film to convey information was novel and therefore widely popular by both military and civilian audiences. This section breaks down the reasons for its popularity without discussing specific propaganda techniques used. 

### The Willing Suspension of Disbelief
The *Why We Fight* series “was the first massive attempt to influence opinion in the U.S. military” (German 237). Even though *The Battle of Russia* is presented to audiences as a fact-driven documentary, it is heavily influenced by theatre, but the U.S. hypothesized it would work because film is already a popular medium. Film, especially in the 40s, is close to theatre. In popular films, they expect clips, sounds, and stories to be changed and manipulated to make films more entertaining. In the case of the *Why We Fight* series, the audience expects filmmakers not to lie about facts, but also expects them not to put the audience to sleep. Film as a medium is expected to be entertaining, so the audience is willing to suspend its disbelief. The series “would shock, cajole, flatter, and uplift America; using every gimmick in Hollywood’s sales kit, it would blend the dark necessity of military service into a theatrical epic” (Rolland 83). Because the film was a narrative documentary with elements of drama, it was more entertaining.

### Appeals to Multiple Senses
Film is also an effective, favorable medium because it appeals to multiple senses. Print, radio, or speeches often uses only one of the five senses, while motion pictures use two. Because the audience could see evidence of real people fighting, it reinforced what the audience heard through the narrator. For example, when describing how Germany is heartless, images show Germans killing women and children. Conveying messages using sight and hearing was not only more enjoyable, but it was more persuasive as well.

### More Believable
“You had to be there,” meant a lot more in the 40s before everyone had cell phones with cameras and YouTube influences covering the world. Someone could write a book or present a speech, but it was not as enjoyable, and it was especially seen as less authentic. Film, on the other hand, “provides authenticity through intimate detail and thus invites personal involvement and response from the viewer” (German 239). When the audience sees intimate details of real life pictures and situations, it helps the audience ‘be there.’  Of course, the story and sequence of events is orchestrated and fabricated together; however, the audience is more likely to disregard the fact that it’s been edited.

### Psychological Reduction, Simplification, and Closure
Before the *Why We Fight* series, members of the military were not happy about being drafted for a war. Some of those members do not understand or are unsatisfied with why they are fighting despite speeches and civic rhetoric. Propaganda achieves psychological reduction and closure by taking the many layers of convoluted, confusing, and complex subject matter and replacing it with a simple and understandable story. The reason why _Why We Fight_ works is that it is simple and understandable; it has a beginning, a middle, and an end. It explains the topic of the movie, it shows war events that are the most horrifying, and it convinces audiences the solution is to fight for America. 

Most narratives are simplified, and the audience can not “see” the entire story. Even though information is broadcasted and published in print, only some audience members learned the story as it happened; however, others only see what is shown in the documentary. As viewers saw glimpses of combat footage, they understood that it was going on, but they did not know how it happened, but they do not need to know because it’s not part of the narrative arc being created. Hitler’s rise to power is omitted. Anything immoral or wrong Russia did is omitted. When the film ended, the audience was left with a simple solution: fight, and thus, they experienced closure. Kathleen German explains, “The natural human tendency to reduce or flatten complex relationships, forming simpler black-and-white or cause-and-effect processes, adds to the propensity to reach closure when viewing film” (German 239).

### Behavioral Directions
“In his widely respected theory of film, Siegfried Kracauer suggests that ‘the film operates as a vicarious experience with which the viewer associates, I think subconsciously, his prior experiences and attributes to arrive at new interpretations and conclusions” (German 239). Kraucer’s point describes how utilizing shared experiences makes the film exciting. Watching new experiences or how people interact with each other is interesting, and humans like surprises and to use their prior experiences to think of problems differently. *Why We Fight* goes a step beyond, by making the viewers first recall American values, and second, by making those viewers think like the narrator who represents team U.S.A. Audiences are brought to the edge of their seats and made to feel that they are facing a real, urgent threat without having to use rational thinking. Film was a popular, favorable tool in part because of the great emotional appeals. Subtle techniques through phrasing or visuals not only reinforce existing values, but have the power to change the audience’s opinions and behaviors.

## Specific Techniques
Like any propaganda, _Why We Fight_ utilizes a number of strategies, from simplifying arguments and emotions to weaving in propaganda under the guise of seemingly objective and truthful facts.


### Vivid Appeals
Vivid appeals include using symbolism, colors, and patterns to establish order and evoke emotion within an audience. In *The Battle of Russia*, evidence includes images of worried innocent Russians, images of grand factories, and images of dead or frozen children. After establishing Russians as innocent by dancing or celebrating, the scene gets darker as large groups of worried Russian citizens appear on-screen. Next, Russia’s strong willpower and determination is shown during images of individuals working together to support the war effort in grand factories. The bright shots leave viewers in awe which develops rapport between the audience and Russian people. Finally, the narrator demonizes Germans by showing powerful and shocking images of dead women and children, killed by Germans. One shot showed several Russian women discovering a dead child and carrying him so he could be buried. Rollins remarks, “all propagandists know the power of suffering children to pull at the heart strings” and these impactful shots, and many others contribute to affect the audiences’ perceptions of Russians and Germans (Rollins 84).

### Subjective Framing
Subjective framing describes manipulating information presented to others by taking clips out of context, rearranging the order of facts or even omitting them. This is especially evident at the beginning of the film, when the narrator introduces Russia by only sharing facts that reflect positively upon Russia. For example, the film shares times when other countries tried to control Russia making Russians seem like victims; however, Russia historically occupied parts of Poland and Romania, not to the liking of either two countries; however, those facts are omitted when describing Russia’s history.

### Demonizing
Both subjective framing and vivid imagery are used in conjunction with demonizing, the act of making a subject seem evil. The Nazis did this by claiming Jews were responsible for the death of Christ, and therefore were the ‘devil.’ *The Battle of Russia* does not objectify Germans as the devil, but it establishes Germans as heartless. An example of both subjective framing and demonizing occurs when the two are preparing for battle. Footage of murdering babies demonstrates how ‘terrible’ Germans contrast with the Soviets. The long and vivid shots of frozen babies left to die make German soldiers seem evil and heartless. Kathleen German describes another example when the narrator explains that Germans have “an inborn love of regimentation and harsh discipline,” implicitely describing them to be heartless as a society (Capra). Obviously not all Germans are heartless; however, the narrator shines the worst of light upon them. 

### Dehumanization
The dehumanizing of an enemy allows propagandists to make them appear less human. The film implicitly establishes Germans as ‘not human’ by using subjective framing. When the film portrays Russian people, the audiences sees them dancing and living life in the same way American civilians generally do. By contrast, Germans never appear in the film except when they are actively fighting Russians. The film further demonizes Germans by making them appear small, with few exceptions when they are on tanks or murdering babies. The audience sees close-up shots of Russians fighting Germans; however, Germans are often shown in dense imagery, a technique which makes the footage so dense and overwhelming that the audience cannot process all the information on the screen. Namely, shots of German soldiers are taken far off in the distance such that their faces are barely recognizable, if at all. One particular shot uses what German calls ‘deep focus.’ She describes how “the effect is to shrink and dehumanize the characters” (German 241). By literally showing Russia as larger and showing Germans as small and in the far off distance, the Germans are not seen as human subjects.

### Techniques Summary
The above techniques are only a few of the many carefully created techniques used in the film. I will list other observations worth mentioning, but did not include in this paper.
1. **Compression of Time** is used to establish what is most important. The majority of the footage shows Russian culture, and virtually zero German culture is showed. When Germans are showed, they are soldiers in big, evil tanks destroying the ‘innocent’ Russian people.
2. **Repetition** of vulgar scenes involving Germans hurting innocent Russians similar to Americans demonize Germany and stress the urgency and importance of U.S. war efforts.
3. **God Terms** are used in the film to appeal to Americans. Americans value qualities like hard work and the fighting for independence. Devil terms are not used as frequently to describe Germans; yet, they are demonized using the aforementioned techniques. 
4. **False Choice** is used to give the audience a perceived black and white choice. Either, they work had with strong willpower and win the war. If they do not contribute to the war effort, they will lose the fight causing Americans to die and a democracy will cease to exist. More simply put, the options are reduced to ‘fight or die.’ 
5. **Animations** by Walt Disney depict German troops and Germany on maps in black, while Russia, the Soviet Union, and other countries are displayed in white.
6. **Music** is usually colorful and happy when explaining and introducing Russians. Once Germans are introduced, the orchestration becomes more scary and darker.

## Audience Response
The music, animations, rhetoric, and editing all play a special role in not only the persuasiveness, but the entertainment value, and thus the overall response. Despite the blatant pro-soviet propaganda, the military and civilian audience enjoyed the documentary. Soldiers were often forced to watch these types of movies, but it was so popular the film became enjoyable by civilians too. Rollins claims by the end of the war, some “54 million Americans had seen the series” (Rollins 84). For scale, the US population in 1945 was roughly 140 million. 

The documentary was so successful, it won the 1943 *National Board of Review Award* for the best documentary award. It won the 1943 *Special Award* from the New York Critics Circle. In 1944, it was nominated for the *Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature*. Finally, in 2000, the film was deemed “culturally significant” enough to be added to the Library of Congress’s national film registry. 

The military tried to measure how ideologies changed as a result of the *Why We Fight* film series. Rollins explains “a special psychological unit was assigned to pre-test and post-test some 2000 soldiers who viewed the series. The results were published after the war, and there has been much debate about the findings” (Rollins 84). Overall, it is safe to say the film was well-received, so much so that Franklin Roosevelt exclaimed “every man woman and child in the world must see this film” when referring to *Prelude to War*, another film in the same series (German 237). Clearly, research concluded that film is more effective than filmstrips, lectures, discussions as an “indoctrination format” (German 238). Although the majority of military and Americans found the film compelling, there were concerns about the efficacy and ethics of the message.

## Concerns & Counter Propaganda
Although Roosevelt, the military, and U.S. citizens enjoyed the documentary, some people viewed the films as dangerous to international relations after the war was over. Not only were perspectives deeply distorted, but people believed them. The *Office of War Information* put a restraint order on the films because they violated guidelines for “treatment of enemy populations — for example, calling the Japanese ‘buck-toothed friends’ of the Germans” (Rollins 84). Roosevelt countermanded the restraint. Although no major propaganda was spread in the United States as a result of this film, it is important to note that the *Why We Fight* series itself is a counter-propaganda movement to the movie *Triumph of the Will*, a Nazi propaganda film promoting Germany under Hitler’s rise to power. Despite the concerns over its unethical nature, *The Battle of Russia* and the *Why We Fight* series was a very successful persuasion tool for rallying American support. 


## Long-Term Effects
Recall that the *Why We Fight* series “was the first massive attempt to influence opinion in the U.S. military” (German 237). Until this series was produced, audiences were largely taught political or military lessons from print or radio. After Hitler’s *Triumph of the Will* and Frank Capra’s *Why We Fight* series, propaganda gained credibility and initiated “the widespread use of film as a device for motivating large numbers of people” (German 237). Additionally, the film promoted research in modern psychological research techniques “in evaluating the effectiveness of film in opinion formation and attitude change” (238). After more analysis, scientists learned that incorporating generalized truths feelings the propagandist wishes to utilize must be present in the audience is most effective at persuading audiences. 

Following WWII, America and the Soviet Union became enemies during the Cold War. Military personnel and civilians were divided on how to fight the communist threat. Communism had spread throughout the U.S. starting hysteria within the country and many claims were backed up by communist propaganda films. *The Battle of Russia* was quickly buried. 

---- 
## Works Cited
- Capra, Frank, and Anatole Litvak. *The Battle of Russia.* [Videorecording]. MPI Home Video, 1984. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=cat02507a&AN=ohiolink.b32137223&site=eds-live.
- German, Kathleen M. “Frank Capra’s Why We Fight Series and the American Audience.” *Western Journal of Speech Communication*, vol. 54, no. 2, 1990, pp. 237–48, doi:10.1080/10570319009374338.
- Rollins, Peter C. “Frank Capra’s Why We Fight Film Series and Our American Dream.” *The Journal of American Culture*, vol. 19, no. 4, 1996, pp. 81–86, doi:10.1111/j.1542-734x.1996.1904\_81.x.
- Slider, Darrell. “The Soviet Union.” Electoral Studies, vol. 9, no. 4, 1990, doi:10.1016/0261-3794(90)90014-Y.
