# Statement of Purpose

Earning a Bachelor of Computer Science from the University of Dayton in May of 2022 taught me the foundations of computer-science and whet my appetite; however, after watching Boston Dynamic’s robot performing backflips, seeing Chat-GPT writing useful code, and working in the simulations industry for a few years, I wish to study more advanced topics.

During my time at UD, I developed several breadth experiences: one of which was working in the theater. I took basic programming before I began working with the theater’s technical crew, so I used basic computer science principles to work as a lighting board operator in UD’s theater program. The lighting board is a complex controller that sends commands to a dimmer rack or individual lighting instruments through a network, so using the board’s shell and debugging not only let me help create mesmerizing shows, but it enriched my understanding of the object-oriented paradigm.

I was not able to work at the theater beyond the second semester of my sophomore year due to an accident. One night, after leaving the library on a skateboard, I experienced a traumatic brain injury and was hospitalized for several weeks, causing me to withdraw from my coursework for the semester. My injury had lasting repercussions, so to succeed academically, I had to manage my time differently and thus quit my theater position. With perseverance, persistence, and the ability to make necessary changes to achieve my academic goals, I was able to earn an A in most of my computer science coursework. My most gratifying accomplishment, and also the biggest obstacle I faced academically, was graduating with honors and gaining a wealth of knowledge despite suffering from a traumatic brain injury as an undergraduate.&#x20;

My career goal is to gain functional and technical expertise in the computer-science field. Currently, I work at the Air Force's Gaming Research Integration for Learning Laboratory. My job entails developing cost-effective, safe game-based solutions such as virtual reality simulations. For example, I worked on a team to create and build a visual-spatial simulation for students to conduct pre-flight inspections on various expensive aircrafts. This reduces the total training time and expense by eliminating the need to purchase more aircraft and corresponding parts. Using VR has other added benefits over physical aircrafts. For example, airmen can run through multiple scenarios quickly and swap the aircraft almost instantaneously. By learning, building, and applying advanced computer science knowledge, I plan to design, build, and conduct immersive experiments which measure and increase performance for airmen in mission-critical settings if real-world situations arise. In addition, knowledge gained through a master’s program will allow me to take more leadership roles in team projects.&#x20;

Graduate school will provide me with the opportunity to study advanced topics such as artificial intelligence. One of the challenges at work is creating realistic and intelligent adversaries. While I have the education and training to build characters, write simple logic, and use recursive solutions, I want to learn how to build, implement, and use machine learning models to improve the adversary's realism. Beyond AI, I hope to learn about other areas of research such as Dr. Forebeck’s foundational problems of distributed systems.

My undergraduate education was full of broad experiences, and now, I am applying to graduate school to focus on the depths of certain areas within computer science. While the tools and technologies change rapidly, learning the underlying fundamentals and applying them to new technologies as they develop will make me a more valuable employee and provide opportunities to grow in the future. Graduate school will allow me to build on the strong foundational skills I obtained through previous school and work experience, and I look forward to building upon them this August. &#x20;
